The general concept of strategy was defined in the second chapter of Book Two. It is the use of an engagement for the purpose of the war. Though strategy in itself is concerned only with engagements, the theory of strategy must also consider its chief means of execution, the fighting forces. It must consider these in their own right and in their relation to other factors, for they shape the engagement and it is in turn on them that the effect of the engagement first makes itself felt. Strategic theory must therefore study the engagement in terms of its possible results and of the moral and psychological forces that largely determine its course.

Strategy is the use of the engagement for the purpose of war. The strategist must therefore define an aim for the entire operational side of the war that will be in accordance with its purpose. In other words, he will draft the plan of the war and the aim will determine the series of actions intended to achieve it: he will, in fact, shape the individual campaigns and, within these, decide on the individual engagement. Since most of these matters have to be based on assumptions that may not prove correct, while other, more detailed orders cannot be determined  in advance at all, it follows that the strategist must go on campaign himself Detailed orders can then be given on the spot, allowing the general plan to be adjusted to the modifications that are continuously required. The strategist, in short, must maintain control throughout.

This has not always been the accepted view, at least so far as the general principle is concerned. It used to be the custom to settle strategy in the capital, and not in the field - a practice that is acceptable only if the government stays so close to the army as to function as a general headquarters.

Strategic theory, therefore, deals with planning; or rather, it attempts to shed light on the components of war and their interrelationships. stressing those few principles or rules that can be demonstrated.

A price or a general can best demonstrate his genius by managing a campaign exactly to suit his objectives and resources, doing either too much nor too little. But the effects of genius show not so much in the novel forms of action as in the ultimate success of the whole. What we should admire is the accurate fulfillment of the unspoken assumptions, the smooth  harmony of the whole activity, which only become evident in final success.

The student who cannot discover this harmony in actions that lead up to a final success may be tempted to look for genius in places where it does not and cannot exist. 