Power and personality. Interplay.

The young Robert Moses, immersed in his dreams, had been totally uninterested in power. And if he had, later, sought it, he had for years sought it only for his dreams. The seeking had been solely on behalf of the vision. If, at last, monumental power had been sought - and used - it had been sought and used as a means to a monumental end.

But Moses' personality made him particularly susceptible to the addiction of power. And now he had been a mainliner for years. And while he had always before sought power only for the sake of his dreams, now, for the first time, he began to seek power for power's own sake, as an end in and for itself.

That a turning point had been reached became apparent in 1936 - when the New York City Tunnel Authority was created.

No sooner had Moses learned that Mayor La Guardia was considering establishing an authority to build a $58,000,000 Queens-Midtown Tunnel than he began hinting, none too subtly, that he would like to be on it, if not in charge of it.

But the tunnel could be financed only with federal funds, and La Guardia, only recently recovered from the Order Number 129 imbroglio, was not about to put himself again in the position of asking for federal money for a man who was personally obnoxious in the extreme to the head of the federal government. Nor did the Mayor see any reason to. The tunnel was not intended to link up with any Moses projects. There were engineers, available outside Moses' organization - most notably Ole Singstad, a cocky, hard-driving, table-pounding Norwegian who had designed the then-novel ventilation system that made the Holland Tunnel feasible, who, after tunnel designer Clifford M. Holland collapsed and died from overwork, had rammed the job though to completion, and who was regarded as the world's leading authority on underwater vehicular tunnels. Direction city legislative representative Reuben A. Lazarus to draft the legislation creating the new authority, La Guardia ordered him: "Leave the son of a bitch off."